# Assignment 4

- [Python functions](#python-functions)
- [Failed CA Banks python script](#failed-ca-banks-python-script)
  - [Requirements](#requirements)
  - [Important notes](#important-notes)
  - [Advice](#advice)
  - [Submitting](#submitting)

## Python functions

Read up on and practice with functions.

* Read [W3C Python Functions](https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_functions.asp) and do the [exercises](https://www.w3schools.com/python/exercise.asp?filename=exercise_functions1).

* *Note required, but strongly encouraged*: Read [Chapter 3 - Functions](https://automatetheboringstuff.com/2e/chapter3/) of *Automate the Boring Stuff*. You can stop right before the section on "Exceptions". **As always, you don't have to do the exercises but you should type in the commands for code examples throughout the text.** 

## Failed CA Banks python script

### Requirements

The deliverables for this assignment are largely the same as our earlier [shell script assignment](1.md#failed-ca-banks-shell-script): 

* Create a CSV containing failed banks in CA based on the [FDIC Failed Banks][] list.
* Print the number of failed banks in CA to the shell

[FDIC Failed Banks]: https://www.fdic.gov/bank/individual/failed/banklist.html

This time, however, you must create a Python script to perform the work. We've also thrown in an extra challenge that involves reformatting a date (something that would have been tricky to do in the shell script using standard Unix tools). 

For this assignment, we've created a starter shell script, or template, called [failed\_banks\_ca.py](../code/failed_banks_ca.py). It includes details on the required steps. **Please read it carefully before starting to code.**

Your job is to download and flesh out [failed\_banks\_ca.py](../code/failed_banks_ca.py) in all the spots where there is a `TODO`.

The steps are detailed in the script, but here's an overview with links to relevant documentation on each task:

* [Download](../docs/python/remote_files.md) the FDIC failed banks CSV using the `requests` library
* [Generate a new CSV](../docs/python/csv.md) called `failed_banks_ca.csv`. The file must contain only failed banks in California. It should have the same header row and columns as the source data. And you must convert the `Closing Date` values to a date formatted as `YYYY-MM-DD` (e.g. `2020-01-29`). You'll need to use [strptime](https://www.programiz.com/python-programming/datetime/strptime) and [strftime](https://www.programiz.com/python-programming/datetime/strftime) from the datetime module to perform the conversion.
* Print a count of failed banks in California to the shell. You must print the following text: `There are X failed banks in CA`, replacing the `X` with the correct count. For example: `There are 1824 failed banks in CA`. The count (`X`) should be generated dynamically. In other words, the value of `X` should be replaced using code; do **not** hard-code the count directly in the text.

### Important notes

* You must write this code exclusively in Python. You should **not** create a shell script containing Unix commands, nor should you "shell out" from Python to Unix commands.
* You *must* use the [CSV module](../docs/python/csv.md); you cannot use `pandas` or other third-party libraries.
* Please do *NOT* use file paths in your code that are specific to your machine. For example, do **not** use `~/Desktop/code/comm-177p-assignment-4/banklist.csv` in your Python script. Instead, simply use the base name of the file (`banklist.csv`). This will make your code more portable so that instructors can download your code and run it. Points will be deducted if user-specific paths are included.

### Advice

* We've provided you with a starter script, but it's helpful to also experiment in the interactive Python interpreter to work through code problems, rather than trying to think your way to a solution. You can always copy/paste the code from the interpreter to your script as you figure out solutions. So be sure to fire up `ipython` as you work through the assignment!
* Use `print` statements in your script to get visibility into the code.

### Submitting

To submit the assignment, you must: 

* Use [DataKit](../docs/datakit.md) to create a new code project called `comm-177p-assignment-4`
* Save the script in the project's `scripts/` directory
* Push your code to GitHub
* Submit the URL to your GitHub repo via Canvas

As a reminder, here's how to create the new project folder:

```
# Navigate to your code directory
cd ~/Desktop/code

# Crate the project
datakit project create
# When prompted:
#  - Choose "1 - Assignment" as the "repo_type" 
#  - Type "4" for the "project_number_or_shortname".
```

As a reminder, below is the standard workflow to save and push code to GitHub.

```
cd ~/Desktop/code/comm-177p-assignment-4

# Install the requirements
pipenv install

# Activate the shell
pipenv shell

# Save and push your code
invoke code.push
```

For more details on how to work with DataKit, see [here](../docs/datakit.md).

**NOTE:** Grading for this assignment will be based both on the script itself as well as your attention to detail. For example, points will be deducted if the script is not named correctly and placed in the proper folder of the project.
