# Assignment 7 - Breaking Ranks on Impeachment

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Setup](#setup)
- [Coding details](#coding-details)
- [Important notes](#important-notes)
- [Submitting](#submitting)

## Overview

You may have noticed a few headlines in recent weeks about the impeachment trial of President Trump. On Wed. Feb. 5th, the U.S. Senate was expected to acquit the president of impeachment charges brought forward by the House of Representatives.

Pundits have been predicting an acquittal for some time, given GOP control of the Senate. But along the way, there was much speculation about centrist Democrats or Republicans who might break ranks with their parties on key votes, such as [calling witnesses in the trial](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/31/us/politics/trump-impeachment-trial.html).

For this exercise, let's say that you, the enterprising data reporter, want to identify senators from both parties who are most likely to break ranks with their parties.

Anecdotally you know of "middle-of-the-road" or moderate senators in both parties, but you want to apply a more rigorous approach to create a longer list of Senators who may break ranks.

ProPublica, a nonprofit investigative news organization, provides a [Congress API][] with a [Members "endpoint"][] that offers one possible window into which senators might be most likely to break with their party via the "votes against party" data point (they also provide "votes with party"). 

For this exercise, let's assume that senators who most often vote against their party are also most likely to make a controversial impeachment vote (e.g. a Democrat voting against one or both articles of impeachment).

[Congress API]:https://www.propublica.org/datastore/api/propublica-congress-api
[Members "endpoint"]: https://projects.propublica.org/api-docs/congress-api/members/

Your task is to find the five members of both parties who are **most likely** to break ranks.

Below are detailed instructions on how to proceed.

## Setup

Sign up for a [ProPublica API key](https://www.propublica.org/datastore/api/propublica-congress-api).

Store the following code in `~/.bash_profile`, replacing `your_api_key` with the actual key: 

```
# Below line goes in your ~/.bash_profile
export PROPUBLICA_API_KEY="your_api_key"
``` 

After adding the key, you should test that it is accessible by opening a new shell and executing the following command: 

```
printenv | grep PROPUBLICA
PROPUBLICA_API_KEY=your_api_key
```

If you have problems with this step, please refer to [Using environment variables to store secrets](../docs/python/using_env_vars_for_secrets.md) or reach out for help.

Create a new [DataKit](../docs/datakit.md) project. The generated project folder should be called `comm-177p-assignment-7`.  

```
cd ~/Desktop/code
datakit project create

# Don't forget to run pipenv install
cd comm-177p-assignment-7
pipenv install
```

Download the [`senate_rank_breakers.py`](../code/senate_rank_breakers.py) starter script and save it to your project's `scripts/` directory. Remember, you need to click the "Raw" button on GitHub to get access to a plain-text version of the file for download.

## Coding details

Now you're ready to flesh out the script. Below are the requirements:

* Use the `requests` library to get data for all members of the current senate from the ProPublica API. To make this API request you will need to read:
  * The Propublica API docs for [Authentication](https://projects.propublica.org/api-docs/congress-api/#authentication) and [Members](https://projects.propublica.org/api-docs/congress-api/members/)
  * The `requests` library docs on how to make a web request with [custom headers](http://docs.python-requests.org/en/master/user/quickstart/#custom-headers)
* Using the members data, find the 5 members of both parties with the highest "votes against party" (or lowest "votes with party") percentages.
* Print a list of 5 Democrats followed by 5 Republicans who are most likely to break ranks with their parties. You must print the name of the party before listing its members below it. Within each group, you must sort members from most to least likely to vote against their party. The line you print for each member should include first and last name, state and the score (e.g. "votes against party"). *Hint: You'll need [string formatting](https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_string_formatting.asp) and [sorting techniques](https://docs.python.org/3/howto/sorting.html) to do this work.*

The output should look something like below (it doesn't have to match precisely).

```
Senators most likely to break ranks:

Democrat
--------
* Kirsten Gillibrand (NY) votes against the party 30.36% of the time.
* Kamala Harris (CA) votes against the party 27.57% of the time.
* Edward Markey (MA) votes against the party 27.14% of the time.
* Joe Manchin (WV) votes against the party 25.75% of the time.
* Kyrsten Sinema (AZ) votes against the party 23.5% of the time.

Republican
----------
* Rand Paul (KY) votes against the party 19.9% of the time.
* Mike Lee (UT) votes against the party 15.32% of the time.
* Susan Collins (ME) votes against the party 11.33% of the time.
* Patrick Toomey (PA) votes against the party 7.89% of the time.
* Ted Cruz (TX) votes against the party 7.34% of the time.

```

## Important notes

* The Senate has a few Independents who are denoted in the ProPublica members data with an `ID` value for the `party` field. In a real-world analysis, we'd likely want to take Independents into account. For this exercise, it's fine to skip the Independents.
* You must adhere to the best practices laid out in the [Art of Writing Functions](../docs/python/art_of_funcitons.md). Specifically, you must create well-named functions for each distinct step in the process described above, and use a "main" function at the top of your script to orchestrate all the other functions. The [`senate_rank_breakers.py`](../code/senate_rank_breakers.py) script that we've provided starts you off on this process, so please be sure to use it.

## Submitting

As always, submission is a two-step process.

```
# Push your code up to GitHub
cd comm-177p-assignment-7
pipenv shell
invoke code.push
```

Then head over to Canvas and submit the GitHub URL to the project.